# grabe-septuagint
My work transcribing and translating the 1707 Grabe Septuagint. The PDFs are scans from the Athens reprint of 1843–1850, based on the Moscow edition of of 1821. The Grabe Septuagint is based on Codex Alexandrinus, which makes it unusual as most editions available today are based on Codex Vaticanus. 

Currently, transcription work is being performed using Gemini 2.5 Flash. This provides a very readable but somewhat inaccurate base. Over time I hope to correct any typographical errors in the text and provide a rough translation of the text.

## Sources

The source PDF files used for this project are not my own work and have been prepared by various sources, which each have different terms that apply to use of their files.

* **Volume I:** Digitized by **Google Books** from the Athens reprint of 1843. Google's usage guidelines for this file request: Non-commercial use of the file, no automatic querying of Google's system, maintaining attribution through the "Digitized by Google" watermark, and adherence to the laws of your local jurisdiction.
* **Psalms 1-4 of Volume III:** Digitized by **Google Books** from the 1730 edition. Included due to missing pages in the file for Volume III. Same guidelines as above. 
* **Volumes II, III, and IV:** Digitized by the **University of Crete, Anemi Digital Library** from the Athens reprint volumes published in 1846, 1849, and 1850 respectively. "Anemi’s digital content is protected by copyright law. Access is provided solely for personal, educational or research purposes. Systematic storage or printing of the whole content of the digital items is strictly forbidden. Commercial use is strictly prohibited." [—Anemi Sitewide Copyright Notice](http://web.archive.org/web/20250712170841/https://anemi.lib.uoc.gr/)

The underlying material is in the public domain. This includes the original text, structure, formatting, layout, and typeface. Those parts of this repository that would represent my own original, copyrightable contribution or derivatives are dedicated to the public domain under [CC0 1.0 Universal](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/deed.en). I waive all of my rights to the work worldwide under copyright law, including all related and neighboring rights, to the extent allowed by law.

## Translations

To increase the usefulness of this project, I have decided to include a translation of the text. There are a few public-domain options available, such as Charles Thomson's of 1808 or Sir Lancelot Charles Lee Brenton's of 1851. Both of these options were problematic due to some poor tranlsation choices and using Codex Vaticanus as the underlying primary text. Effectively all English translations of the Septuagint possess this latter deficiency, which necessitates a new translation. While the ideal is one produced by a human expert—or, better yet, a team of human experts—a machine-generated translation provides an adequate base for study and future improvements. 

The machine-generated translation is in the public domain in the United States based on current guidance from the US Copyright Office. Furthermore, the translation is free from copyright as it is not a derivative of nor does it substantially copy or include copyrighted translations. Where it does include similar or identical phrasing to copyrighted translations, this is due to the constraints of translating the same underlying work, which necessarily limits the range of creative expression required to create a faithful rendering. Biblical translations, especially ones based on a formal equivalence philosophy, possess only a "thin" copyright, meaning its copyright only protects against substantial verbatim copying of the original creative expression of the translator(s). To reduce the likelihood that the AI translation would produce this kind of substantial verbatim copying, the AI was instructed to write in Jacobean English reminiscient of the King James Version or American Standard Version, two translations that are in the public domain in the United States. Checking portions the text produced against various translations shows that it does not conform substantially to nor provide verbatim quotation of the protected expression of popular currently-copyrighted Bible translations. Its differentiation is also bolstered by its base-text, the Grabe Septuagint, which is different from all available English Bible translations, most of which are based on the Hebrew Masoretic text, while existing English translations of the Septuagint utilize Swete's Septuagint, Rahlfs(-Hanhart), or the Göttingen edition. 
