#### The Prophecy of Obadiah

**Chapter 1**

**1** The vision of Obadiah. Thus saith the Lord God unto Edom: A report have I heard from the Lord, and a proclamation hath He sent forth among the nations:

**2** "Arise ye, and let us rise up against her for battle!" Behold, I have made thee small among the nations; thou art greatly despised. **3** The pride of thine heart hath lifted thee up, thou that dwellest in the clefts of the rock, whose habitation is high, who saith in his heart, "Who shall bring me down to the ground?" **4** Though thou mount up as the eagle, and though thou set thy nest among the stars, thence will I bring thee down, saith the Lord.

**5** If thieves had come unto thee, if robbers by night, (how utterly wouldst thou be cast down!) would they not have stolen [only] enough for themselves? And if grape-gatherers came to thee, would they not leave some gleanings? **6** How is Esau searched out, and how are his hidden treasures seized? **7** Unto thy borders have they sent thee away; all the men of thy covenant have risen against thee, thy men of peace have prevailed against thee; they have laid a snare beneath thee, nor was there understanding for thee concerning them.

**8** In that day, saith the Lord, I will destroy the wise men out of Edom and understanding out of the mount of Esau. **9** And thy mighty men from Teman shall be dismayed, to the end that man may be utterly cut off from the mount of Esau. **10** For the slaughter, and for the impiety against thy brother Jacob, shame shall cover thee, and thou shalt be cut off forever. **11** From the day that thou stoodest in opposition in the day when strangers carried away his host captive, and foreigners entered into his gates, and cast lots upon Jerusalem, even thou wast as one of them. **12** Neither shouldest thou have looked upon the day of thy brother in the day of strangers, neither shouldest thou have rejoiced over the children of Judah in the day of their destruction, neither shouldest thou have spoken proudly in the day of [their] distress. **13** Neither shouldest thou have entered into the gates of the peoples in the day of their affliction, neither shouldest thou, even thou, have looked upon their gathering in the day of their ruin, neither shouldest thou have joined in attacking their force in the day of their destruction; **14** neither shouldest thou have stood in their crossroads, to utterly destroy those of their own that did escape, neither shouldest thou have encircled those of his own that fled in the day of distress.

**15** For near is the Day of the LORD upon all the nations. As thou hast done, so shall it be done unto thee; thy recompense shall be returned upon thine own head. **16** For as thou hast drunk upon My holy mountain, so shall all the nations drink wine; yea, they shall drink, and they shall fall down, and they shall be as though they had never been. **17** But upon Mount Zion shall be salvation, and it shall be holy; and the house of Jacob shall inherit those who had dispossessed them. **18** And the house of Jacob shall be a fire, and the house of Joseph a flame; but the house of Esau [shall be] for stubble. And they [the house of Esau] shall be kindled by them [the houses of Jacob and Joseph], and they [the houses of Jacob and Joseph] shall consume them [the house of Esau]. And there shall be none to bear the torch in the house of Esau; for the Lord hath spoken [it].

**19** And they that dwell in the Negev shall inherit the mount of Esau; and they that dwell in the Shephelah, the foreigners; and they shall inherit the mount of Ephraim, and the plain of Samaria, and Benjamin, and Gilead. **20** And this [shall be] the beginning of the exile for the children of Israel: even that [which is found among] the Canaanites, unto Sarepta; and the exile of Jerusalem, [which is found] unto Sepharath. And they shall inherit the cities of the Negev. **21** And those rescued shall come up from Mount Zion, to take vengeance upon the mount of Esau; and the kingdom shall be the Lord's.
